.. _20251101_2_8_0_release:

Release Notes (v2.8.0)
======================

`November 1, 2025`

The v2.8.0 release includes major features and improvements.

- Resource-aware task scheduling
- Resource monitoring
- Queue-only task submission
- Rate limit task execution
- Local SQLite database enabled by default
- Default logging level set to INFO
- New command-line argument checks

-----

Features
--------

|

Resource-aware task scheduling
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

HyperShell now supports resource-aware scheduling with task-level CPU core, memory, and time
requirements. These requirements can be specified for all tasks en masse or on an individual basis.
The client-side scheduler intelligently manages task execution based on resource availability.

.. note::

    For existing workflows or simpler cases where no resource requirements are given for
    tasks, none of the following mechanisms are engaged and task parallelism will behave
    exactly as it has in previous releases of the software.

    Lack of a resource constraint will be interpreted as 0 cores, 0 memory, and tasks may
    run indefinitely as before.


**Command-line Options**

The following options control resource management across the CLI:

.. list-table:: Resource Management Options
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 10 20 50 20

   * - Short
     - Long
     - Purpose
     - Config Source
   * - ``-c``
     - ``--cores``
     - CPU cores required per task
     - ``task.cores``
   * - ``-m``
     - ``--memory``
     - Memory required per task
     - ``task.memory``
   * - ``-W``
     - ``--task-timeout``
     - Walltime limit per task (seconds)
     - ``task.timeout``
   * - ``-C``
     - ``--client-cores``
     - Limit cores available to client
     - ``client.cores``
   * - ``-M``
     - ``--client-memory``
     - Limit memory available to client
     - ``client.memory``
   * - ``-T``
     - ``--timeout``
     - Client idle timeout (seconds)
     - ``client.timeout``

These options are available across the ``submit``, ``client``, and ``cluster`` commands where
appropriate. The ``cluster`` command supports all six options because it both submits tasks
(with requirements via ``-c``/``-m``/``-W``) and launches clients (with limits via ``-C``/``-M``/``-T``).
The ``submit`` command supports task-level options (``-c``/``-m``/``-W``), while the ``client``
command supports client-level options (``-C``/``-M``/``-T``).

Note that ``-W``/``--task-timeout`` sets a per-task walltime limit and is used by the scheduler
for backfilling decisions, while ``-T``/``--timeout`` controls how long a client waits idle
before shutting down when no tasks are available. In prior releases of the software the ``client``
supported a global ``-W``/``--task-timeout`` as well (it still does) which lets the caller
define a uniform timeout for all tasks executed by the client. In this release we
combine this with individual task-level timeouts. The ultimate timeout (if there is one) for
a given task will be the shorter of either of these provided.

**Inline Resource Specification**

Resource requirements can also be specified inline using the ``#HYPERSHELL:`` comment syntax.
This is a special case for the existing inline tag annotations.
This allows per-task resource heterogeneity within a single input file, overriding any
command-line defaults.

.. admonition:: Inline comment directives specify per-task resource requirements
    :class: note

    .. code-block:: shell

        stress -c 4 -t 10s  #HYPERSHELL: cores:4 memory:2GB timeout:60
        stress -c 8 -t 60s  #HYPERSHELL: cores:8 memory:4GB timeout:120

**Executor Thread Mechanism**

Each client runs multiple executor threads (configured via ``-N``/``--num-threads``), with each
thread capable of running one task at a time. When a task is ready to execute:

1. The executor thread attempts to *acquire* the required resources (cores and memory)
2. If resources are available, the task starts immediately
3. If resources are insufficient, the task enters a priority-based wait queue
4. When the task completes, resources are *released* back to the pool

This design allows clients to oversubscribe executor threads relative to available cores,
enabling efficient resource utilization through intelligent backfilling.

**Priority-based Scheduling with Backfilling**

Tasks waiting for resources are tracked with increasing priority. Higher-priority tasks
(those waiting longer) are scheduled first. However, the scheduler implements intelligent
*backfilling* where smaller tasks with shorter timeouts can "jump ahead" if they can complete
before higher-priority tasks would be able to start.

Consider this example task file:

.. admonition:: Task list example demonstrates backfill scheduling
    :class: note

    .. code-block:: shell

        stress -c 4 -t  5s  #HYPERSHELL: cores:4 timeout:60 n:1
        stress -c 4 -t 10s  #HYPERSHELL: cores:4 timeout:60 n:2
        stress -c 8 -t 10s  #HYPERSHELL: cores:8 timeout:60 n:3
        stress -c 4 -t 10s  #HYPERSHELL: cores:4 timeout:15 n:4
        stress -c 4 -t 10s  #HYPERSHELL: cores:4 timeout:60 n:5
        stress -c 4 -t 10s  #HYPERSHELL: cores:4 timeout:60 n:6
        stress -c 4 -t 10s  #HYPERSHELL: cores:4 timeout:60 n:7
        stress -c 4 -t 10s  #HYPERSHELL: cores:4 timeout:60 n:8

On a client with 8 cores and 3 executor threads:

1. Tasks ``n:1`` and ``n:2`` start immediately (4+4=8 cores used)
2. Task ``n:3`` arrives and waits (needs 8 cores, gets priority 1)
3. Task ``n:1`` completes after ~5 seconds, freeing 4 cores
4. Task ``n:4`` arrives and needs 4 cores, gets priority 2
5. Task ``n:4`` backfills ahead of ``n:3`` because:

   * Task ``n:4`` has a shorter timeout of 15s
   * Task ``n:2`` will a worst case timeout of 60s (~55s from now)

6. Task ``n:3`` starts when both ``n:2`` and ``n:4`` complete

This backfilling strategy significantly improves throughput for heterogeneous workloads with
mixed resource requirements and execution times.

**Adaptive Sleep for Priority-based Wakeup**

When multiple tasks are waiting for resources, HyperShell uses an adaptive sleep mechanism
to ensure tasks wake up and check for availability in priority order. Instead of all waiting
tasks checking simultaneously (which would create a worst-case n-factorial wait period),
each task sleeps for a duration proportional to its priority ratio:

* High-priority tasks (ratio=1.0) sleep ~0.5 seconds
* Low-priority tasks (ratio approaching 0.0) sleep ~1.0 seconds
* Small random jitter (±0.05s) prevents exact collisions

This creates a natural "wake-up cascade" where the highest-priority task checks first,
followed by progressively lower-priority tasks. This minimizes lock contention on the
resource scheduler while ensuring fair, priority-based access. As tasks complete and
resources become available, waiting tasks are efficiently promoted and scheduled without
unnecessary polling overhead.

.. admonition:: Warning - Rename command-line option names
    :class: warning

    The ``--num-tasks`` option has been renamed to ``--num-threads`` to better reflect
    its purpose as the number of executor threads per client. The old ``--num-tasks``
    name is maintained for backwards compatibility but may be deprecated in future releases.

|

Resource monitoring
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

HyperShell can now monitor the actual CPU and memory usage of running tasks and their child
processes using the ``--monitor`` option. This provides visibility into resource consumption
and helps identify tasks that may be under or over provisioned.

**Enabling Monitoring**

Add the ``--monitor`` flag to the ``cluster`` (``hsx``) or ``client`` commands:

.. admonition:: Enable resource monitoring for workflow
    :class: note

    .. code-block:: shell

        hsx tasks.in --monitor -c 4 -m 2G

When monitoring is enabled, HyperShell continuously tracks CPU core utilization and memory
consumption for each task and all its child processes using the ``psutil`` library.
For each task, resource usage is sampled during the ~1 second cycle-time during which
the executor thread is waiting for task completion.

**Data Collection and Storage**

* **Peak usage**: Maximum observed values are stored in the database as ``cores_max`` and
  ``memory_max`` for each task. These are stored with decimal precision.
* **High-resolution telemetry**: Full time-series data is written to a CSV file alongside the
  ``.out`` and ``.err`` files (see ``--capture``). These are stored in the ``$HYPERSHELL_SITE``
  library (``~/.hypershell/lib`` by default on Linux).
  There are only three columns: ``time``, ``cores``, ``memory``.

**Resource Limit Warnings**

When both monitoring and resource requirements are specified, HyperShell automatically
detects when tasks exceed their allocated resources and emits a warning:

.. admonition:: Resource limit warnings when monitoring enabled
    :class: note

    .. code-block:: text

        ...
        Resource limit exceeded (...): cores 1.41 (used) > 1.00 (allocated)
        Resource limit exceeded (...): memory 1.62GB (used) > 1.00GB (allocated)

These warnings:

* Are emitted **once per task** to avoid log spam
* Help identify tasks that need resource requirement adjustments
* Do not terminate the task—they serve as informational warnings only
* Include **tolerances** to avoid false positives from measurement fluctuations
  or rounding errors:

  * CPU: 0.05 cores tolerance
  * Memory: 5 MB tolerance

**Use Cases**

* **Profiling**: Understand actual resource consumption to right-size task requirements
* **Optimization**: Identify resource bottlenecks and opportunities for parallelization
* **Validation**: Verify that tasks respect their resource allocations
* **Debugging**: Diagnose memory leaks or unexpected CPU usage patterns

.. tip::

    Use monitoring during development and testing to establish baseline resource requirements,
    then apply those requirements (``-c``/``-m``) in production runs for optimal scheduling.

|

Queue-only task submission
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``hs submit`` command now supports direct submission to a live server queue, bypassing
the database entirely. This provides a lightweight alternative for transient workflows or
environments where a database is not configured or desired.

Use the ``-q``/``--queue`` option along with ``-H``/``--host``, ``-p``/``--port``, and
``-k``/``--auth`` to submit tasks directly to a running server:

.. admonition:: Submit tasks directly to live queue
    :class: note

    .. code-block:: shell

        # Start a server
        hs server --forever --auth mykey &

        # Submit tasks directly to the queue
        hs submit tasks.in -q -H localhost -p 50001 -k mykey

When using queue mode, tasks are sent directly to the server's in-memory queue for
immediate scheduling by connected clients. Without ``--queue``, the traditional
database-backed workflow is used, providing persistence, recovery, and search capabilities.

.. note::

    The ``-b``/``--bundlesize`` option controls how tasks are bundled and sent to clients.
    In queue mode, this directly affects the size of task bundles conveyed to connected clients,
    which can impact throughput and responsiveness. Coordinate bundle size with the number of
    executor threads (``-N``/``--num-threads``) on your clients for optimal performance.


|

Rate limit task execution
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The concept of rate limiting has been added (available as ``-R``, ``--ratelimit``) for both
cluster and client commands as a per-client limit on tasks executed per second. For example,
specifying ``-R5`` would restrict the workflow to only permit a maximum throughput of 5 tasks
per second or 300 per minute per client. This is applied by computing a *minimum* task walltime
and entering into a waiting cycle if a task completes in less than this time.

This can be useful in a number of scenarios; for example, data processes where the tasks are
pulling files over an API and we want to ensure we do not exceed the rate limit of the API.

|

-----

Improvements
------------

|

Local SQLite database enabled by default
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In previous releases of the software we automatically disabled use of the database in favor
of a *live* queue if there was no database configuration. This behavior is still possible using the
explicit flags ``--no-db`` (and ``--no-confirm``) which suppresses the warning new users would otherwise
get for running the software out-of-the-box. With this change we have a smart preload as part of the
configuration that injects ``main.db`` as the database file name within the default *site* library.
Use of the ``HYPERSHELL_SITE`` environment variable alters this location.

On Linux this would be ``~/.hypershell/lib/main.db``.

The motivation here is to more seamlessly enable the beneficial features without new users running
the software for the first time from needing to grapple with this behavior. So instead of getting a
warning message the first time they run the software they get powerful features. Any database
configuration provided by the user or system disables this new behavior of course.

|

Default logging level set to INFO
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Similar to the above change with the database enabled by default we have also updated the default
logging level to ``INFO`` instead of ``WARNING``. It is probably never the case that users (particularly
in a research workflow context) to want zero messages from HyperShell. Even with ``INFO`` level messages
enabled there are relatively few messages emitted. These messages are predominantly emitted by the
client as task start. A few messages at the start of operations about the state of the database are
typically emitted as well.

|

-----

Bug Fixes
---------

|

Fixed client signalwait option name
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``hs client`` command now uses the correct long option name ``--signalwait`` (with short option
``-S``) for the task-level signal escalation wait period. Previously, the code used ``--task-signalwait``
while the documentation and help text specified ``--signalwait``. This has been corrected to match the
documentation and align with the ``hs cluster`` command, which also uses ``--signalwait``.

This is purely a bug fix for consistency. The functionality remains unchanged, and the option controls
how long the executor waits between sending escalating signals (SIGINT → SIGTERM → SIGKILL) when
terminating tasks that exceed their timeout.

|

Fixed server poll configuration parameter
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The :const:`~hypershell.server.DEFAULT_SERVER_POLL` (previously ``DEFAULT_QUERY_PAUSE``) parameter defines
the number of seconds the scheduler thread waits between polling the database when no tasks are available.
This parameter can now be configured via the command-line (``-Q``/``--poll``), configuration file 
(``server.poll``), or environment variable (``HYPERSHELL_SERVER_POLL``).

Previously, this configuration option was defined but not actually used by the server implementation,
meaning the hardcoded default always persisted regardless of user settings. This release fixes the
implementation to properly respect the user's configuration.

The default value remains at 5 seconds, which provides a good balance between responsiveness and database
load for most use cases. This conservative default is appropriate for new users who may not initially be
aware of this parameter, while still allowing for customization based on workflow requirements:

- **Lower values** (e.g., 1-2 seconds): More responsive to newly submitted tasks, better for interactive
  workflows, but may increase database query load when idle
- **Higher values** (e.g., 10-30 seconds): Reduces database query frequency when idle, useful for
  large-scale deployments with infrequent task submission or extended idle periods

.. note::

    This was previously defined as ``server.wait`` in the configuration (``HYPERSHELL_SERVER_WAIT``
    environment variable), and somewhat confusingly ``DEFAULT_QUERY_PAUSE`` in the code. This code
    variable has been preserved for backwards compatibility. However the configuration parameter
    name is only now ``server.poll`` as there is no point in maintaining the old name because it
    was never actually used until now.
